---
layout: post
title: "Yabs: Why?"
date: 2014-11-13
tags: dev
desc: Why I decided to make a new build system
---

At this point in time I have only been programming for about 2-3 years. Around 90% of this time I've allocated to 
programming and learning languages has been entirely out of self initiative. Though that process is a story for a 
different time, one of the major obstacles for me was a build system.

## Make
At first I had learned how to write a Makefile, something any programmer should be able to do trivially. Though this
 only really solves few problems, and with ugly non-human readable syntax. Make is a bit of an old tool, and while it does its job well it does not come equipped with tools to be able to test things not only locally, but remotely.
 
## Qmake
My first introduction to Qmake was through a video of  Dirk Hohndel giving a talk about Subsurface's transition from 
GTK to Qt. In this talk he spoke about how a contributor had written a beautiful, hand written Makefile and how 
another contributor ported their build system to Qmake and made the system completely boring (by making it simple). So I went and took a look at Qmake and found it very easy to use and understand. It was very easy to change compilers, architectures and platforms. The syntax for defining projects was easy to read and rather easy to understand. The only 
draw back that I could find to it was that it was highly geared toward being used for Qt projects and as far as I was concerned it was not meant to be used to deploy test nor builds to remote systems.

## CMake
My experience with CMake is very limited, and with one main reason: the syntax. The syntax for building a project on
CMake is quite atrocious. Seriously, just look at this:

{% highlight CMake %}
IF (WIN32 AND WINHTTP AND NOT MINGW)
	ADD_DEFINITIONS(-DGIT_WINHTTP)
	INCLUDE_DIRECTORIES(deps/http-parser)
	FILE(GLOB SRC_HTTP deps/http-parser/*.c deps/http-parser/*.h)
ELSE ()
	IF (NOT AMIGA)
		FIND_PACKAGE(OpenSSL)
	ENDIF ()

	FIND_PACKAGE(HTTP_Parser)
	IF (HTTP_PARSER_FOUND AND HTTP_PARSER_VERSION_MAJOR EQUAL 2)
		INCLUDE_DIRECTORIES(${HTTP_PARSER_INCLUDE_DIRS})
		LINK_LIBRARIES(${HTTP_PARSER_LIBRARIES})
		SET(LIBGIT2_PC_LIBS "${LIBGIT2_PC_LIBS} -lhttp_parser")
	ELSE()
		MESSAGE(STATUS "http-parser was not found or is too old; using bundled 3rd-party sources.")
		INCLUDE_DIRECTORIES(deps/http-parser)
		FILE(GLOB SRC_HTTP deps/http-parser/*.c deps/http-parser/*.h)
	ENDIF()
ENDIF()
{% endhighlight %}
At this point you'd might as well write a shell script that builds your project for you. Why learn a second language 
in order to use a build system?

I saw that build systems lack these few important features:

* Easy to read, easy to write configuration files
* Ability to send builds and tests to remote systems
* Define the project being worked on
* Natively not be language specific

The most significant of these was the syntax for configuration files. These absolutely must be easy to read and to
write.

## Cargo
Out of all language specific package managers and build systems that exist, Cargo has been the most promising. While 
of course Rust and Cargo are not yet near stable, Cargo has been extremely easy to use. It's only drawback is that 
it is language specific. This is a side effect of it being both a package manager and a build system. A very 
appealing feature that Cargo has is (semi) automatic dependency solution through a configuration file.

## A Middle Ground
Through all the build systems that I observed a few themes seemed to be commonplace. Those are this that these 
systems are either platform specific, have non-human readable configurations or do not offer solutions for testing. 
These features are often not implemented natively and are either a side effect or a hack. The spawning of several 
language specific has left the packaging systems heavily fragmented and dependent on specific infrastructure. Ruby 
with gems, Python with pip, Perl with CPAN, Objective C with Cocoa Pods and now Rust with Cargo.

## What About C?
C, the inarguably most important programming language of human history does not have an official package manager. 
Mainly as a side effect as being concieved in order to implement Unix. As such, Unix is C's packaging manager. 
Abstractly, Unix and Unix-like distrubutions' packaging managers are C's package manager.

Historically the way for C sources to be compiled and used on a local system is using autotools and make. These can
be rather difficult or unintuitive to use. When I was learning C and C++ these tools seemed very cumbersome to learn 
and use. Mainly due to an ailment already described, their configurations.

## Ideally
Ideally, a build system should be easy to use. Ideally, a packaging system should be available to distribute 
applications and projects easily and allow for remote deployments and testing. This is can be implemented more 
easily now more than ever as most languages have specific packaging managers. How though, as these tend to introduce 
fragmentation? Well, as each has their specifics, these can be used to an advantage to abstract them away as the 
specifics are already implemented within these systems.

Yabs is and will be an opinionated build/packaging system, it will be cross platform, and most importantly it will be
 easy to use.